content/books/NeedAdded.md, before:


# Wanted Books
### <small>All books must be Public Domain. If a book on this list is not Public Domain, do not include it</small>

The Christian Priest Today   
The Idea of the Holy  
The Quest of the Historical Jesus  
The Practice of the Presence of God  
The Prayers and Meditations of St. Anselm with the Proslogion  
A Theology of Liberation  
Moral Man and Immoral Society  
The Screwtape Letters  
Ecclesiastical History of the English People  
Mere Christianity  
Christ and Culture  
The Cloud of Unknowing  
Centuries of Meditations  
The Dark Night of the Soul  
Confessions by Saint Augustine  
The Rule of Benedict by St.Benedict  
Summa Theologica by Saint Thomas Aquinas  
Revelations of Divine Love by Julian of Norwich  
Pensees by Blaise Pascal  
City of God by Saint Augustine    

### All books need to be added via last-name/book-title.md
### For Example...

content/books/Bunyan/PilgrimsProgress.md  
content/books/Chesterton/Heretics.md  
content/books/Chesterton/Orthodoxy.md  
content/books/Chesterton/the-blatchford-controveries.md  
content/books/Guyon/guyon.md  
content/books/Chesterton/Newman/Apologia-Pro-Vita-Sua.md  

#### <small>If necessary, use (last-name)-(first-name) for the folder name.</small>

Commit message:

Removed the Practice of the Presence of God and added more info on two books

content/books/NeedAdded.md, after:


# Wanted Books
### <small>All books must be Public Domain. If a book on this list is not Public Domain, do not include it</small>

The Christian Priest Today   
The Idea of the Holy  
The Quest of the Historical Jesus  
The Prayers and Meditations of St. Anselm with the Proslogion  
A Theology of Liberation  
Moral Man and Immoral Society  
The Screwtape Letters  
Ecclesiastical History of the English People  
Mere Christianity (<b>not public domain</b>)  
Christ and Culture  
The Cloud of Unknowing  
Centuries of Meditations  
The Dark Night of the Soul  
Confessions by Saint Augustine  
The Rule of Benedict by St.Benedict  
Summa Theologica by Saint Thomas Aquinas (<b>this will take a while</b>)  
Revelations of Divine Love by Julian of Norwich  
Pensees by Blaise Pascal  
City of God by Saint Augustine    

### All books need to be added via last-name/book-title.md
### For Example...

content/books/Bunyan/PilgrimsProgress.md  
content/books/Chesterton/Heretics.md  
content/books/Chesterton/Orthodoxy.md  
content/books/Chesterton/the-blatchford-controveries.md  
content/books/Guyon/guyon.md  
content/books/Chesterton/Newman/Apologia-Pro-Vita-Sua.md  

#### <small>If necessary, use (last-name)-(first-name) for the folder name.</small>
